.Dd March 02, 2022
.Dt anyvpn 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm anyvpn
.Nd connect to a Cisco AnyConnect VPN
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl Vhlv
.Op Fl m Ar method
.Op Fl p Ar app
.Op Fl s Ar site
.Ar on|off|sites
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is a simple script that allows you to connect to a
Cisco AnyConnect VPN via the commandline by supplying
your password and 2FA method so as to minimize
interactions with the process.
.Sh OPTIONS
The following options are supported by
.Nm :
.Bl -tag -width m_method_
.It Fl V
Print the current version information and exit.
.It Fl l
Log out of the password manager after fetching the
password.
.It Fl h
Display help and exit.
.It Fl m Ar method
Use this 2FA method.
Valid options are 'push' or a Duo 2FA code.
Defaults to 'push'.
.It Fl p Ar app
Use this password manager app.
Currently supported: keychain, lastpass, onepass.
If not specified,
.Nm
will use 'lastpass'.
.It Fl s Ar site
Connect to this site.
Defaults to the value of the VPN_SITE environment
variable or, if that is unset, the first site
condigured in AnyConnect.
.It Fl v
Be verbose.
Can be specified multiple times.
.El
.Pp
Any other arguments are passed through to the
AnyConnect VPN command.
.Sh DETAILS
In order to connect to a VPN via Cisco
AnyConnect, you may need to provide your password as
well as a second factor.
Retrieving your password from a password manager can
be cumbersome, since AnyConnect does not integrate
with e.g., LastPass, leading to many people
choosing to use an easy to remember VPN password.
.Pp
.Nm
provides the necessary glue to make it easier to
connect to the VPN without having to unlock your
password manager and copy and paste your password.
.Sh PASSWORD MANAGER CONSIDERATIONS
In order to retrieve your password from your password
manager, and unless you are using the macOS keychain
.Ns ( Fl p Ar keychain Ns ),
.Nm
needs to begin a session with the password manager or
reuse an existing one.
.Pp
The behavior with respect to new sessions is as
outlined below:
.Bl -bullet
.It
If an existing session is found
("lpass status -q" for
.Xr lpass 1 ;
a valid session token in the
.Ev ONEPASS_SESSION
environment variable for
.Xr op 1 Ns ),
.Nm
will reuse that session.
.It
If no existing session is found,
.Nm
will initiate a new session.
.El
.Pp
Since a new session for
.Xr op 1
is exposed only via an in-memory token, termination of
.Nm
effectively makes that session unavailable for any
other processes, even if it still remains technically
active, which is why
.Nm
explicitly invalidates it if it originally started it.
.Pp
On the other hand, a
.Xr lpass 1
session initiated by
.Nm
will remain active after the script terminates.
Such a valid password manager session may then allow other
processes to access secrets from that password
manager.
This is by design and can in fact be useful when using
other tools that may require a password to be pulled
from the password manager.
.Pp
To ensure
.Nm
invalidates the newly started session, pass the
.Fl f
flag.
.Sh EXIT STATUS
The
.Nm
utility will exit with a value of 255 if it encounters
any problems prior to executing the AnyConnect 'vpn'
command.
Otherwise,
.Nm
will return with the exit value of the AnyConnect
\'vpn' command.
.Sh EXAMPLES
The following examples illustrate common usage of the
.Nm
utility.
.Pp
To add a new password to the "VPN" keychain service
and then use
.Nm
to connect to the VPN using that password from the
keychain:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
security add-generic-password -a ${USER} -s VPN -w '<password>'
anyvpn -k keychain on
.Ed
.Pp
To connect to the VPN using the password stored under
the "Yahoo" login entry in your LastPass password
manager for the "jschauma@yahoo.com" account:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
export LASTPASS_LOGIN="jschauma@yahoo.com"
export PM_VPN_ENTRY="Yahoo"
anyvpn on
.Ed
.Pp
To connect to the VPN using the password stored under
the "Yahoo" login entry in your 1Password password
manager for the "jschauma@yahoo.com" account in your
company's team vault "mycorp.1password.com":
.Bd -literal -offset indent
export USER="jschauma"
export DOMAIN="yahoo.com"
export PM_VPN_ENTRY="Yahoo"
export ONEPASS_ADDRESS="mycorp.1password.com"
anyvpn -p onepass on
.Ed
.Pp
To connect to the "NYC" VPN site using an existing
1Password session from your personal 1Password
account:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
export ONEPASS_SESSION="$(op signin --raw)"
export PM_VPN_ENTRY="Yahoo"
anyvpn -s NYC -p onepass on
.Ed
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
The following environment variables affect the execution of this tool:
.Bl -tag -width LASTPASS_VPN_ENTRY_
.It Ev ANYCONNECT_PREFIX
The path to where AnyConnect is installed.
Defaults to "/opt/cisco/anyconnect".
.It Ev DOMAIN
The domain to use when constructing your
LASTPASS_LOGIN or ONEPASS_LOGIN ID.
.Pp
If unset, then
.Nm
will try to identify a suitable domain by looking at
/etc/resolv.conf or the output of the
.Xr hostname 1
command.
.It Ev KEYCHAIN_VPN_ENTRY
The name of the keychain entry ("service") for your
VPN login.
.Pp
If unset, then
.Nm
will use "VPN".
.It Ev LASTPASS_LOGIN
The full LastPass user ID.
This may be e.g., "first.lass@company.tld",
"${USER}@company.name" etc.
.Pp
If unset, then
.Nm
will use
"${USER}@${DOMAIN}".
.It Ev LASTPASS_VPN_ENTRY
The name of the LastPass entry for your VPN login.
.Pp
If unset, then
.Nm
will use the value of the PM_VPN_ENTRY environment
variable.
.It Ev LPASS_AGENT_TIMEOUT
Not directly used by
.Nm ,
but used by
.Xr lpass 1 ,
this variable defines in seconds the validity of your
LastPass session.
Set this to e.g., 28800 for an 8 hour LastPass cache
validity.
.It Ev ONEPASS_ADDRESS
The 1Password "sign in address".
If not specified, defaults to "my.1password.com".
See https://is.gd/BR670l for details.
.It Ev ONEPASS_LOGIN
The 1Password user ID.
This may be e.g., "first.lass@company.tld",
"${USER}@company.name} etc.
.Pp
If unset, then
.Nm
will use
"${USER}@${DOMAIN}".
.It Ev ONEPASS_SESSION
The 1Password
.Xr op 1
session token to use.
Setting this in your environment allows you to sign in
to your 1Password account in your shell, and
.Nm
to retrieve the password without requiring your master
password to be entered.
.Pp
If unset, then
.Nm
will sign in to your 1Password account, prompting you
for your master password, retrieve the VPN password,
and then invalidate the session.
.It Ev ONEPASS_VPN_ENTRY
The name of the 1Password entry for your VPN login.
.Pp
If unset, then
.Nm
will use the value of the PM_VPN_ENTRY environment
variable.
.It Ev PM_VPN_ENTRY
The name of the password manager entry for your VPN
login.
If unset, then
.Nm
will use "VPN".
.It Ev USER
The local username, as commonly set on most unix
systems.
This variable is not used directly, but some of the
other variables described here may derive their
default value from this variable.
.Pp
If unset, then
.Nm
will use the output of 'id -un'.
.It Ev VPN_SITE
The name of the VPN site to connect to.
Supported values can be shown by specifying
.Ar sites
as the argument to
.Nm .
.Pp
If unset, then
.Nm
will use the first site configured in AnyConnect.
.It Ev VPN_USER
The short name / user ID, commonly your VPN or SSO
login name.
.Pp
If unset, then
.Nm
will use "${USER}".
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr lpass 1 ,
.Xr op 1 ,
.Xr security 1
.Sh HISTORY
This script was originally written by
.An Jan Schaumann
.Aq jschauma@netmeister.org
in June 2020.
.Sh BUGS
Please file bugs and feature requests via GitHub pull
requests and issues or by emailing the author.
